the ss morrow castle was an ocean liner
completed in the 1930s
for the ward line company it made trips
between new york and havana cuba
it got its name from the morrow castle
that guards the entrance to havana bay
on september 5th 1934 the ship embarked
on its final trip
with more than 500 people on board in
the afternoon of september 6th
the liner came across strong winds and
thick clouds
the next morning the clouds became
thicker and the wind shifted to the east
this was the first sign of a developing
storm
that day the captain of the ship robert
wilmot
had his dinner delivered to him he soon
complained that his
stomach hurt later he was found
unconscious without a pulse
chief officer william worms took over at
this point
the winds were traveling at 30 miles per
hour but things were about to get worse
at 2 50 in the morning of september 8th
a fire was detected in the storage
locker on b
deck 20 minutes after its discovery the
fire burned through the main
electrical cables the ship fell into
complete darkness
the radio stopped working and the crew
had only managed to send
a single sos within 30 minutes
the liner was engulfed in flames the
chief officer tried to beach the vessel
but it was impossible
the crew couldn't steer the ship because
the fire had damaged the hydraulic lines
the only option was to launch the
lifeboats and get off the ship
the passengers had to jump into the
stormy waves some of the crew members
tried to fight the fire
others threw life rings and deck chairs
into the water for people to hold on to
unfortunately only six of the 12
lifeboats were launched
their combined capacity was 408 people
but they were carrying less than 100
most of them crew members rescue
services reacted slowly
three rescue ships appeared and a fourth
one sent a motorboat over to the morro
castle
it did a quick circuit around the ship
and after not seeing
anyone in the water it left the scene
then two coast guard vessels showed up
but because they positioned themselves
too far away
they didn't spot the passengers in the
water and offered very little help
the coast guard aerial station didn't
send out any float planes until local
radio stations began to report on the
incident
that was when some small boats arrived
at the scene
and then finally a plane managed to save
the day
it helped the boats find the people in
the water by dipping its wings
and dropping markers the story of the
morrow castle kept gaining more and more
momentum in the news
and local citizens went to the coastline
to help
on board there was a lady named martha
bradbury
she had left her hometown to become a
nurse four years later
she and fellow nurse lillian davidson
went on a journey to cuba
they boarded the ship on september 1st
1934 in new york
and by the fifth they were on their way
back home
on september 7th everyone had been
planning to go to a party on board
but because of the captain's passing the
event was canceled
she and her friend went to their rooms
to sleep and the cruiser kept sailing
at 3 30 am they were woken by an
official announcement
they were ordered to put on their life
vests and go to the rear of the ship
immediately
martha and lillian rushed to the deck
according to her statement
someone on the deck told lillian not to
be scared
because the ship was fireproof but the
fire was burning through everything in
its path
martha helped her friend climb over the
rail of the deck
and they both jumped into the water for
eight hours
martha floated in the stormy ocean she
was carried further and further away
from the ship
and the other passengers after the sun
came up
martha saw several lifeboats in the
distance but none of them spotted her
a few more hours went by and she was
beginning to lose hope
but then she saw a small plane passing
overhead
soon a fishing boat approached her a
fisherman pulled her up
and she was given some overalls to ward
off the coal
both martha and lillian were taken to
the hospital
before being transported to their
workplace and they stayed there for two
weeks
cannon thomas was another survivor who
ended up in the water
he was picked up by a coast guard vessel
after spending several hours in the sea
he remained in the hospital for three
days and forwarded his hospital bill to
the company that owned the morro castle
but the reply he received told him that
the company wasn't liable
and they respectfully denied his claim a
17 year old assistant person named
thomas torrison had a different story
his father was a marine superintendent
for the ward line company
tom had fallen in love with the ship
when he traveled with his mom during his
senior
year he immediately talked to his dad
about becoming a deck cadet
that summer he was given a day's notice
to become the third assistant purser
when a crew member got sick
and the position opened up so he spent
his summer making the weekly cruise to
havana
when the fire began to spread tom roused
the passengers from their staterooms and
guided them to the deck
someone saw a young person who seemed
lost he had clearly come into contact
with the fire tom took a hold of the boy
and gave him instructions on how to stay
in the water
he told him to put his arms around his
neck to stay afloat
by mid-morning the ship was completely
abandoned
its burning hull drifted ashore and
stopped in the shallow
waters off asbury park in new jersey
late in the afternoon
but the fires continued to burn for days
afterwards
a quarter of the passengers aboard
didn't make it and the ship was declared
a total loss
it was towed away on march 14 1935
while it was in new jersey it became a
tourist attraction
some people believe it sank while it was
towed away
but others say it was scrapped the
question remains
who started the fire there was one
unusual person aboard
who perhaps fits the bill the chief
radio operator
george white rogers he actually became a
hero
because he was the one who sent out the
distress signal without getting any
orders from the bridge
he also stayed on board to help the
passengers and he later
shared his story on broadway to sold out
crowds
but it turns out that he was quite a
shady character
he had been a bit of a troubled
youngster later in life he enrolled in a
college course on radios
after he completed it he took up work on
the ss costa rica
it seems he got the job by showing a
first-class operator's license
but there is no evidence that he was
ever issued with this kind of document
he also gave the names of businesses
that no longer existed
and schools that no one had heard of
after the incident
he opened a radio repair shop that
failed and it coincidentally
burned down too he then joined the
bayonne police department as a radio
assistant
that was when his boss lieutenant
vincent doyle
became suspicious of rogers and started
asking him questions about the morrow
castle
in march 1938 rogers gave a tank heater
to doyle
telling him it needed to be repaired but
when doyle plugged it in
it exploded meanwhile there is no
conclusive evidence linking rogers to
the fire on board